You Can Hear the Whistle Blow a Hundred Miles
NASHVILLE — Walter Mondale had no chance of beating Ronald Reagan in 1984, and everyone knew it. I went to a Mondale rally at Philadelphia’s Love Park anyway. The musical guests that day included Stephen Stills; Peter, Paul and Mary; and the immortal B.B. King, but the song I’ve carried with me ever afterward is not “Teach Your Children” or “The Thrill Is Gone.” It’s “500 Miles.”“Lord, I’m one, Lord, I’m two, Lord, I’m three, Lord, I’m four / Lord, I’m five hundred miles from my home.” I can hardly think of my one disastrous grad-school semester in Philadelphia without hearing Peter, Paul and Mary’s version of “500 Miles” playing in my head like a soundtrack. “If you miss the train I’m on, you will know that I am gone / You can hear the whistle blow a hundred miles.” Even now, that lonely song is a faithful echo of my own loneliness in 1984, the perfect articulation of my own despair.I had gone home to Alabama for Thanksgiving, and on the last night before I was to return to school, the tears started flowing and would not stop. My father did the only thing he could think of to help: He bought a train ticket to Philadelphia. Amtrak tickets were sold out when I was looking for a way home, but Dad found me a seat on a northbound train. If I had to go back at all, he figured, the train would at least get me there far more quickly and far more comfortably than the bus. For my father, a ticket for the Southern Crescent was a tourniquet, a way to stop the bleeding if not a way to stop the pain.The Crescent, which runs from New Orleans to New York City, is still an Amtrak route today, passing through Mississippi, Alabama, Georgia, the Carolinas, Virginia and continuing on to points north. To ride the Crescent is to take a tour through much of the American South — big cities and small towns and sprawling farms, rivers and bayous and mountains and forests — including many parts of this region that aren’t visible from an Interstate highway.