I’m Haunted by Daniel Pearl’s Murder
Nineteen years have passed since Daniel Pearl, a gregarious Wall Street Journal reporter, was beheaded on videotape in Pakistan. That’s enough time for his then unborn baby to grow up and be admitted to college; enough time for Angelina Jolie to play his widow in a movie; enough time for that movie — and the era of the war on terror that it depicted — to fade from public memory.But I can’t forget. Daniel Pearl and I were both trying to interview the same reclusive spiritual leader in Pakistan when he was kidnapped and killed. “Don’t worry,” a spokesman for the spiritual leader assured me. “If anyone gets an interview, it will be you.” But Mr. Pearl, a more seasoned journalist who served as The Journal’s South Asia bureau chief at the time, found someone who promised to arrange the coveted interview. He jumped into a taxi and disappeared.Weeks later, Mr. Pearl’s beheading shocked the world. That was the moment I realized that this thing we do called journalism contained dangers I hadn’t contemplated before. It was a fitting lesson for the era of the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks, which opened the country’s eyes to how easily it could become a victim. And so it was upsetting to read recently that a Pakistani court ordered the release of Omar Sheikh, the British-born militant who orchestrated the kidnapping of Mr. Pearl. Mr. Sheikh had been sentenced to death in 2002, but the execution never happened. Last year, a Pakistani court downgraded his conviction to a simple abduction — punishable by seven years in prison, which he had already served.The court rulings open old wounds and illuminate a central question at the heart of the war on terror that remains unresolved: Are there some crimes so terrible that we must never let the perpetrators walk free, even if a judge orders it? The United States opened the prison for suspected terrorists on Guantánamo Bay on the premise that the “worst of the worst” were too dangerous to release, regardless of the outcome of a trial. Khalid Shaikh Mohammed, the mastermind of the Sept. 11 attacks — who confessed to beheading Mr. Pearl — has yet to go on trial, more than 14 years after his arrival at Guantánamo Bay. Americans seem to have made a problematic peace with the contradictions of believing in the rule of law and indefinite detention at the same time.