Freelancers Shouldn’t Have ‘Horror Stories’
Two years ago, a beauty company in New York hired a freelance writer named Leigh to draft copy for products and advertisements. It was a part-time job with a 1099 contract that didn’t pay enough for her to turn down other assignments, and she wasn’t sure how long it would last.Some months in, the company increased her hours to the point that she was essentially full-time. The job became her sole source of income and was no different from a regular employee’s. Yet the company still treated her as an independent contractor. She had no paid time off, no sick leave or 401(k), and had to buy her own health insurance. Then, at the beginning of the pandemic, she came down with what she hoped was just a vicious cold. She didn’t dare call in sick, consult with sympathetic co-workers or complain to her boss.“I was a little scared to argue about my status,” she told me. “I didn’t have any power or leverage.” As a contractor, she was on her own: Freelancers have no right under current federal law to collectively bargain or organize with other workers for help. (Leigh recently became a W2 employee and asked that I use only her middle name, for fear of retaliation for complaining about her previous classification.)The Protecting the Right to Organize Act is a radically worker-friendly bill that would give freelancers like Leigh a chance to fight for more. Its intent is to patch holes in the tattered cloth of the 1935 National Labor Relations Act, which gives most private-sector employees the right to come together and speak out about conditions on the job. Recently passed by the House and now bound for a skeptical Senate, the PRO Act would make it much easier for workers already covered by the N.L.R.A. to organize and pressure employers to improve pay and health standards. It would also give millions of 1099 independent contractors and freelancers the same right to organize that traditional W2 employees have, greatly expanding the universe of workers covered by the N.L.R.A. As a freelance journalist myself, I’m especially excited about this part of the legislation.