What DMX’s Poetry of Death Did for Hip-Hop
If you’ve ever attended a DMX concert, it’s more than likely that you’ve seen him cry. As the adrenaline of the night would cool, the rapper born as Earl Simmons would pray, acting as the intercessor for the holy spirit on behalf of the audience, through a sheet of sweat and tears.Long before he died on Friday at the age of 50, Simmons lived like a man who knew his death was around the corner. Death was a constant — in his lyrics, on his tattooed skin, in his high-risk lifestyle. And it was there in his Christian faith, and in the conversations with God that he invited the world to witness. DMX was obsessed with his own demise, perhaps because, like many Black people in this country, he was haunted by the reality that he would most likely die prematurely.After the heart attack that put him in a coma on April 2, fellow artists and fans shared stories of their interactions with Simmons. Sofiya Ballin shared a video of him telling a group of homeless men in Philadelphia that he saw himself in them. BET livestreamed Rap City episodes in which Simmons appeared, including one where he was asked about a good deed: buying the building that a church that once sheltered him was being evicted from, to return it to the pastor. And many recalled the Verzuz battle in which he and Snoop Dogg danced, sang and prayed together. These videos, recollections and interactions are an archive of a man who was at his best outside the celebrity culture that had often dismissed him as a kind of punchline.The first tattoo DMX ever had etched into his skin was of a grim reaper clutching the leash of a pit bull. The reaper and the canine were constant presences in his music and his world. Years later, reflecting on their meaning, the rapper suggested that the tattoo, on his left triceps, cast a prophetic pall over his life. “What I didn’t realize is that … when you put something on your body, you kinda bind yourself to it,” he explained to the hip-hop and R&B website The Boombox in a 2012 interview. “In a way I think that’s one reason why I’ve had a lot of the problems I’ve had throughout my career.”