The Hopeful Future and the Patients Who Won’t See It
It takes nearly an hour to clean an intensive care unit room between Covid-19 patients.The curtains come down first. Next the custodial staff removes the trash, disposable gowns and gloves, biohazard bins, leftover belongings. They wipe the room down with bleach. New sheets on the bed, hospital corners. Mop the floor until the splatters of bodily fluids are gone, until it shines.I stopped to watch this process on one recent overnight shift as we prepared for a new patient. She was in her mid-60s, intubated with severe respiratory failure from Covid-19. In some states she might have been vaccinated weeks ago, but not yet in Massachusetts, where 7.2 percent of the population has been vaccinated, a rate lower than in three-quarters of the rest of the country. And now she would enter the same freshly cleaned room where countless Covid-19 patients lived and died before her.This is a time of hope. We have a new administration and safe and remarkably effective vaccines developed in record speed. But in the hospital, the excitement of the initial rollout is fading, replaced with an uncomfortable new reality. Though my colleagues and I are privileged to be vaccinated, many of our high-risk patients do not even know when they will receive their first dose. More than 3,000 Americans are still dying because of this virus each day. Even as new cases decline throughout the country, including in my state, we are now tracking highly infectious variants. It is a race. And in this strange moment, even as we allow ourselves to imagine a return to normality, all we can do is wait, and make sure there are empty beds to care for the patients who will fill them.As I walked through the unit that night, a resident consulted me about a patient admitted a few days before, an older woman with Covid-19. Her lungs had grown so sick that one of them had collapsed, and air was filling the space under her skin, which was crackling to the touch, expanding like a balloon with each breath the ventilator delivered. The surgeons were about to put in a chest tube so that the air could escape — a move that might help her survive the night, until her family could see her.