It’s My Idea. She’s Taking Credit.
Send questions about the office, money, careers and work-life balance to workfriend@nytimes.com. Include your name and location, or a request to remain anonymous. Letters may be edited.Leadership can be challenging and not everyone is a good leader. You are already on the right track with your willingness to ask questions. Internships are designed, ideally, to help college students or recent graduates gain valuable experience in their chosen field. It is an apprenticeship. Unfortunately, too many organizations treat interns as cheap labor hired to handle the work they don’t want to do.Treat your interns like rising professionals. They are there to support your work, but they also have taken the internship to learn. Create a good balance between giving them enough responsibility and teaching them how to do the work to which they aspire. An internship is, generally, a part-time position so don’t try to extract from them the work you would expect of a full-time, salaried employee. Outline clear expectations and provide both constructive feedback and praise when merited. Give them credit for their ideas in group settings and include them in work situations where they may not be needed but where they might benefit from the exposure. Find ways to incorporate lessons that they won’t learn in a classroom about how to be in your profession, and how to be a professional in the workplace. Model not only how to lead but how to follow. Admit when you’re fallible and apologize when you’re wrong. Be yourself, be humane and generous, be confident and firm. Be the supervisor and mentor you wish you once had.Your co-worker is a strange woman in search of a personality and right now she is borrowing from yours and those of your other colleagues. I can imagine it is both disconcerting and frustrating. This is probably more common than you think. I’ve definitely worked with this kind of person before and for whatever reason, this behavior engenders my pity. It’s so sad.