Lilly Singh’s Week: Pixar’s ‘Soul’ and ’90s Bollywood
A decade ago, the comedian Lilly Singh started making videos out of her parents’ house in Scarborough, an inner suburb of Toronto. She swiftly attracted viewers with her vibrant, goofy impersonations, many to do with diasporic Punjabi family dynamics, embedded in comedic sketches.Her YouTube channel may boast nearly 15 million subscribers, but these days Singh’s bona fides come from a different space. In 2019, she was the first openly bisexual woman of color to front a late night show (“A Little Late With Lilly Singh”) as well as a first among YouTube phenoms. She’d done the impossible: made it out of the bedrooms of internet-addicted kids and into the bedrooms of their parents. But the late night format isn’t quite right for the D.I.Y. star. Season 2, which premieres Jan. 11 on NBC, leaves behind the standard couch-and-desk setup for a set in a house that will allow her to move and experiment. She released a statement about her hope to get more goofy and authentic. And she’s backed by an all-new staff, after a season that drew mixed reviews.She’s going back, in a sense. These days, she’s shooting her YouTube videos in her own house in Los Angeles. (A byproduct of making millions while being a good Punjabi kid who lives at home is you can eventually move out.) “I have gone full circle,” she said about her latest parody videos — a recent one tracks a woman on a Zoom date. “The pandemic forced me to go back to my roots of shooting by myself, editing the video, doing all the lights and sound and camera stuff that I used to do. Building the tripod on books like I used to do.”Lately Singh has been examining her priorities. At 32, she’s on the cusp of a time in adulthood that might inspire a reconsideration of quick success. The solitude perhaps enhances the moment. This year marked the longest she has gone without seeing her family. “I’m sure people can relate when I say I’ve been in a state of numbness,” she said with a laugh. “And confusion, and being lost. But I also think there has been this kind of sweet silver lining, a little bit. I learned what actually matters. Before, I was on autopilot.”