‘The Equalizer’ Review: Queen Latifah on the CBS Assembly Line
Hearing that Queen Latifah is playing the title role in a new iteration of “The Equalizer” — that combination of latter-day Robin Hood and action-movie vigilante — inspires equal measures of expectation and dread. When she cuts loose, in movies like “Bessie” and “Chicago,” she has a fierce and quick-witted swagger few performers can match. But will a CBS procedural drama give her the room to do anything besides cash checks for seven or eight years?In the words of the ad the Equalizer uses to solicit clients — placed in a newspaper in the 1980s television series, on Craigslist in the 2014 film remake and on social media in the new series — the odds are against her. And on the evidence of Sunday night’s premiere, the only episode available for review, CBS is firmly in control. Latifah puts a human face on the formulaic silliness and incapacitates faceless bad guys with aplomb, but there’s nothing in the pilot that requires her to do anything but coast on her charm.Like the male Equalizers played by Edward Woodward (in the original series) and Denzel Washington (in two films), Latifah’s Robyn McCall is a former intelligence operative — this time identified as a C.I.A. agent — who grew disillusioned with the government’s methods and retired. “Everybody’s playing chess, nobody’s thinking about the living, breathing pieces that we sacrifice along the way,” she tells her former C.I.A. boss (played by Chris Noth) in a prime example of the dialogue, alternately stiff and threadbare, she has to do battle with. (“Remember Tangiers?” “I smell a rat.”)Like Washington’s McCall in the films, she’s accidentally drawn into her new career of do-goodery when she comes to the aid of a young woman in trouble. It’s emblematic of the plot contrivances rigged by the show’s creators, Andrew W. Marlowe and Terri Edda Miller, that McCall randomly spots the woman late at night at Coney Island, follows her out of protective curiosity and is quickly drawn into a scheme involving a murdered lawyer, mercenary war criminals, a deep-fake video and an Elon Musk-style auto executive.