Revisiting the Unusual Celebrity of Stephen Hawking
HAWKING HAWKINGThe Selling of a Scientific CelebrityBy Charles SeifeStephen Hawking was, by a wide margin, the best-known figure from the world of science from the mid-1980s until his death in 2018. “Hawking Hawking,” by the accomplished science journalist and historian Charles Seife, is a tough-minded portrait of the theoretical physicist. Taken literally, though, the book’s provocative title is misleading: “Hawking Hawking” is a full-fledged biography, not an exposé or takedown. But the title accurately captures the book’s iconoclastic spirit. This is not another contribution to the vast Hawking hagiography.Let me briefly recall the most basic facts of Hawking’s life. In 1942 he was born in Oxford, England, into an accomplished medical and academic family. He received his undergraduate degree from Oxford and got his Ph.D. from Cambridge in 1966, largely based on his mathematical proof that showed that an expanding universe must begin in a singularity — the singularity theorem.As early as 1963 he began to develop symptoms of motor neurone disease, also known as A.L.S. This disease typically runs a fatal course within a few years, but Hawking’s illness developed slowly. Still, his condition worsened over time. By the late 1970s his speech was difficult to understand and he was in a wheelchair. Despite his physical challenges Hawking continued to produce good work in physics, including most notably his startling theoretical demonstration, in 1974, that black holes should spontaneously radiate — a phenomenon that came to be known as Hawking radiation. Although observation has been elusive owing to the smallness of the effect, Hawking radiation is one of the most outstanding applications of quantum mechanics to gravitation, and it continues to inspire hundreds of research papers yearly.In 1979 Hawking was appointed to the Lucasian professorship at Cambridge, a position previously occupied by Isaac Newton, Charles Babbage and Paul Dirac. “A Brief History of Time,” Hawking’s presentation of his work for a popular audience, appeared in 1988 and it made the best-seller lists for several years. Stephen Hawking became an iconic celebrity, instantly recognizable to millions if not billions of people all over the world.