The French Count Who Turned His Home Into a Museum to Honor His Dead Son
LETTERS TO CAMONDO By Edmund de WaalThree unwieldy boxes of porcelain collect dust in the basement of my building. Sealed away after my grandmother’s death 30 years ago, they contain rococo lamps, fragile urns and multiple sets of gilt-edged china that can’t go in the dishwasher. I will probably never unpack these impractical relics. But I keep them because they represent a link — beautiful yet brittle — to people I have lost.Edmund de Waal’s “Letters to Camondo” will fascinate anyone who has projected complicated emotions onto objects. In his award-winning 2010 book, “The Hare With Amber Eyes,” de Waal traced a set of the Japanese miniature carvings known as netsuke as they got passed from one generation of his family to the next, and ingeniously tied the history of European Jews under Hitler to the fate of these precious curios. His evocative new book shifts focus from his own family to their neighbor in fin de siècle Paris: the Count Moïse de Camondo, whose home near the Parc Monceau became a museum of 18th-century French decorative art. Composed of a series of intimate letters to the long-dead count, the book follows de Waal as he wanders from room to room in the museum, commenting on its treasures and offering quietly profound reflections on French Jewish history, the nature of collecting and the vicissitudes of memory.The story of the Camondo family epitomizes both the highs and lows of the Jewish experience in France. Born in 1860 in Constantinople to a Sephardic banking dynasty, Moïse moved to Paris at a young age and quickly adopted French culture as his own. After his divorce from the French Jewish heiress Irène Cahen d’Anvers, who ran off with her riding instructor, he set about rebuilding his family’s mansion to showcase his superlative collection of furniture and porcelain. When his son, Nissim, a fighter pilot, died for France in World War I, the count decided to leave his house and collection to his adopted homeland. The Musée Nissim de Camondo opened its doors in 1936, following Moïse’s death. Just a few years later, during the Nazi occupation, the French authorities repaid his generosity by deporting his only surviving descendants, his daughter, Béatrice Reinach, and his grandchildren, Fanny and Bertrand, to their deaths at Auschwitz.