An Anti-Gang Activist, a Shooting and a Community Long Abused and Ignored
THE HOLLY Five Bullets, One Gun, and the Struggle to Save an American Neighborhood By Julian RubinsteinTerrance Roberts shot and injured Hasan Jones in 2013. There is no question about that. What made this shooting fascinating to people in Denver was the question of which Terrance Roberts shot Jones. Roberts had risen to prominence locally and nationally as a peace activist, after years in the Bloods gang and serving a decade in prison on several felony convictions. Roberts’s anti-gang effort, known as the Colorado Camo Movement because of its members’ camouflage gear, unfolded in the very section of Denver he used to run. Had Roberts, the founder of a youth mentoring organization, acted in self-defense against Jones, a gang member? Or did ShowBizz — Roberts’s gang moniker — appear that day because, in fact, Roberts had never really changed?In “The Holly: Five Bullets, One Gun, and the Struggle to Save an American Neighborhood,” the journalist Julian Rubinstein, who was raised in Denver, returns home to deliberate on why Roberts shot Jones after years of disavowing street violence. Drawing on rich research and extensive reporting, Rubinstein sets out to chart the social and historical forces that joined two men and a 9-millimeter automatic pistol on a late September day, in the neighborhood known as the Holly. Roberts was arrested moments before a peace rally that he had organized was supposed to begin, leaving his supporters shocked and wondering if they had celebrated ShowBizz’s death too soon.“Terrance felt duty-bound to keep the neighborhood’s violence at bay,” Rubinstein writes, taking us back in time to explore Roberts’s roots — key, he suggests, to understanding the activist’s allegiance to the Holly. In the process, Rubinstein weaves a story of African-American migration from the South to the West through the experience of Roberts’s grandmother Ernestine Boyd, along with accounts of residential and economic segregation, the civil rights struggle and the war on drugs. Although there is little mystery about who’s responsible for the shooting that opens the book, as Rubinstein connects Denver’s past to Roberts’s present, he discovers that all is not what it appears to be in the city’s efforts to reduce gang violence or in the police’s relationship with the Holly community.