From Spain to Sydney to Small-Town New Mexico, 3 Debuts Anchored by a Strong Sense of Place
PERMAFROST By Eva Baltasar Translated by Julia Sanches 131 pp. And Other Stories. Paper, $15.95.At the opening of Baltasar’s novel, the unnamed narrator is at the edge of a high building, contemplating suicide. She remarks lightheartedly on her surroundings (“The air is so pure! But not too humid, which is nice”), and considers her body: the unwieldy parts “like oversized furniture,” and whether her eyes will be open in her fall. She doesn’t, however, take the leap. Instead, this unconventional and refreshing novel takes us through a series of vignettes that skip around this woman’s 40-some-year life, as she inhabits the metaphorical edge, where there is “room to live, vertical as ever, brushing up against the void.”It is difficult to describe the novel’s plot, since there is very little. The narrator is revealed through musings and scenes: growing up in Barcelona with a family of pill poppers; college years spent studying art history (“a dead end that went on for five years”) and having lots of sex; an especially vivid depiction of her 11-year-old self watching porn for the first time and discovering her desire for women; more suicide attempts; intense adult relationships with women she both does and does not love; and tender moments with her niece, who offers a sense of grounding.What carries the book (translated from the Catalan by Sanches) is the bracing and deeply intimate voice of the narrator; she is funny, raw, brutal, dark and oddly uplifting in her honesty. After a seemingly innocuous conversation with her sister, she feels she must feign enthusiasm, “a colossal effort that leaves me dead tired. Seriously, this is the sort of behavior that drives people to medicate.” Even when mulling over her possible deaths, she finds some humorous and mortifying physical detail in each scenario — the cats she might squash below if she jumps off a roof, the untidiness of her bathroom where she’d be found, the possibility of a garden slug “trailing its miserable life over my miserable death.”We are alongside the narrator as she seeks escape from the external world and its social conventions, alongside her intoxication with the physical world, while also desiring death. And though the ending perhaps moves too swiftly, the experience of reading this book is utterly unforgettable.