Art’s Greatest Enemy Might Not Be Science
WONDERWORKS The Twenty-Five Most Powerful Inventions in the History of LiteratureBy Angus Fletcher THE MODERN MYTHS Adventures in the Machinery of the Popular ImaginationBy Philip BallYet once more the humanities are in crisis. Across college campuses, courses in literature, art history and the classics are increasingly regarded as optional add-ons to degrees in social and hard sciences, rather than social obligations in themselves. And in response to justified demands that Western academia acknowledge that it has long defended the artifacts and intellectual habits of white supremacy, humanities departments have become divided on how to move forward in the 21st century.But crisis has defined the humanities from the start. Beginning in the 15th century, the studia humanitatis were a practical new approach to learning that focused on the knowledge and skills needed to become fully human. Renaissance humanism placed contemplation in the service of action, arguing that the function of intellectual, aesthetic curiosity was to fashion a virtuous, effective citizen. This carried all kinds of contentious assumptions about what humanity and virtue were (and were not). Humanists were skeptical of the older, competing claim that the point of studying culture, especially antiquity, was for its own sake, as a way to understand the nature of truth and beauty. The debate has never been settled, basically because both sides of the argument are valid and problematic at the same time. It’s what makes studying the humanities important, and maddeningly vague.In “Wonderworks,” Angus Fletcher, a Renaissance literature scholar at Ohio State University, attempts a practical approach to putting the humanities back on the map. The table of contents alone inspires a certain kind of wonder, bordering on incredulity. Fletcher covers almost 30 centuries of storytelling, from Homer’s “Iliad” and Confucian-era Chinese odes to “Winnie-the-Pooh,” Maya Angelou and “30 Rock”; from St. Augustine, Dante and Shakespeare to Frederick Douglass, George Eliot and Marcel Proust. The sheer volume of written matter Fletcher takes on reminded me of the time I asked one of my college professors if he’d read Samuel Richardson’s endless novel “Clarissa.” “Read it?” he said. “I haven’t even taught it!”