A Writer Shakes Her Family Tree, and Cherishes Every Leaf
The Russian poet and journalist Maria Stepanova’s Aunt Galya died at 80, surrounded by “layered strata of possessions, objects and trinkets.” Years before, Galya had begun “the process of decluttering her apartment, and this gradually consumed her,” Stepanova writes, an endless cycle of “tidying and re-evaluating” during which “there was no longer any deciding whether a particular thing was important or not, because everything had significance in some way.” This same principle of infinite significance in finite things provides Stepanova’s “In Memory of Memory” with its purpose, its emotion, its interest and its tedium.Stepanova’s own occasional descriptions of her project in this book give an accurate sense of both her methods and her style, so she might be the best guide as to whether this daring combination of family history and roving cultural analysis is your kind of thing. She takes notes, she writes, everywhere, in a “hasty and unsystematic manner.” Sharing scraps from the past, she says, “brings some relief” to her. “As if, like a vanquished wizard, I could disappear, becoming a thousand ancient, neglected, blackening objects. As if my life’s work was to catalog them all. As if that is what I grew up to do.”This is, in short, a work of obsession. Stepanova says she began writing it — in a more or less spiritual sense, one presumes — when she was 10. She’s now 48.Stepanova writes a lot about her family members, but she writes a lot around them as well. She writes what she knows about her roots, while frequently admitting that she doesn’t know nearly as much as she’d like. As a seeker of big revelations, she describes herself as “assiduous, but unlucky.” She notes in a somewhat disappointed tone that none of her forebears had “been repressed or executed,” that “none had lived under German occupation or fought in the battles of the century.” She stylishly laments: “Everyone else’s ancestors had taken part in history, but mine seemed to have been mere lodgers in history’s house.” (Her great-grandmother Sarra Ginzburg, one of the ghosts most vividly conjured in the book, did spend time in prison for distributing illegal literature.)