To Light Up a Dark Time, Effervescent Poems of New York City
LOVE AND OTHER POEMSBy Alex DimitrovUntil the pandemic of 2020, I had never watched “A Hard Day’s Night.” I have now seen it probably 15 times. My wife and I are spending our quarantine months in a suburban house with our toddler twins, Jasper and Wesley, and the twins have developed an obsession with the Beatles. They’re especially fixated on Richard Lester’s 1964 film, an absurdist romp in which John, Paul, George and Ringo thwart rules and needle authority figures and frolic in fields in between performing songs that percolate with joy. You can see why kids would connect with it. You can also see how the movie must’ve been a postwar antidote to gloom when it came out in the summer of 1964, months after the assassination of President John F. Kennedy.My own private “Hard Day’s Night,” at home, has been a copy of Alex Dimitrov’s “Love and Other Poems.” I have found myself flipping through it all the time (but usually when the twins are napping) for an impromptu shot of delight. The book revives the persona of the downtown flâneur — it’s full of nods to Prince Street and Cafe Orlin and the Strand — and reading it feels like wandering around that pre-pandemic metropolis that we’re aching to get back to. From a business standpoint, the timing of books (and movies) tends to be arbitrary — they’re released when they’re ready — but every now and then a new one seems to dovetail with the cultural moment. “Love and Other Poems” is an example of that. It practically embodies the phrase “breath of fresh air.” It comes to us in the midst of widespread loss and grief, with faint signals of hope on the horizon, but it nudges us (if I can borrow a line from a poem by the Nobel laureate Louise Glück) to “risk joy / in the raw wind of the new world.”Here in his third volume Dimitrov comes across as an unabashed romantic. The first poem in the book, “Sunset on 14th Street,” begins this way: “I don’t want to sound unreasonable / but I need to be in love immediately.” A scene unfolds: New Yorkers dashing home at the close of day. But these are 21st-century New Yorkers, more technocrats than boulevardiers. They don’t smoke. They drink green juice. They stare at their phones. As Dimitrov writes,Dimitrov’s lines are clear and conversational, and if you happen to detect an immediate and uncanny resemblance to Frank O’Hara — the flow of city streets, the openheartedness, the easy swing of the words, the exclamation points — well, that’s intentional. O’Hara is such a constant presence in “Love and Other Poems” that it’s hard to figure out whether Dimitrov’s tribute represents an act of longing or impersonation. Dimitrov certainly doesn’t try to hide it. The book gets rolling with an epigraph from O’Hara — “All I want is boundless love” — and the pages that follow are peppered with allusions to the bard of “Lunch Poems.” One of O’Hara’s most famous works is “Having a Coke With You.” So when Dimitrov calls a poem “Having a Diet Coke With You,” he knows what he’s doing, even if he’s not sure it’s a good idea:If you’re a Frank O’Hara fan (and who isn’t?), the nakedness of Dimitrov’s New York School ventriloquism can throw up a hurdle, at first. It’s like listening to an indie band that sounds so much like the Velvet Underground that you can’t stop hearing Lou Reed’s voice in your head.