10 New Books We Recommend This Week
Our recommended novels this week will transport you to midcentury England (Shirley Hazzard’s reissued “The Transit of Venus”) as well as to some wholly imaginary lands: a fictional African village in Imbolo Mbue’s “How Beautiful We Were,” an unnamed and haunted tourist destination in Jamie Figueroa’s “Brother, Sister, Mother, Explorer,” a dream version of Transylvania in Gyorgy Dragoman’s “The Bone Fire.” The setting of Patricia Lockwood’s “No One Is Talking About This” — the first two-thirds of it, anyway — is essentially a fictional version of Twitter, which in real life already feels two steps removed from real life. And yet the novel, like all of these novels, still captures something beautiful and true. “The mind we were in was obsessive, perseverant,” Lockwood writes at one point. “But worth remembering: The mind had been, in its childhood, a place of play.”We have nonfiction as well: a surprisingly comic family memoir about the legacy of the Holocaust, and a history of humanity’s ancient impulse to organize into cities. A thorny true crime narrative. A look at industrial agriculture and the modern food chain. And a manifesto about the potential for Black voters to change the culture and politics of the South, and the nation.Gregory CowlesSenior Editor, BooksTwitter: @GregoryCowlesPLUNDER: A Memoir of Family Property and Nazi Treasure, by Menachem Kaiser. (Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, $27.) Kaiser, the descendant of Polish Jews, is a young writer who grew up in Toronto. “Plunder” is about what happens after he takes up his Holocaust-survivor grandfather’s battle to reclaim an apartment building in Poland that the family owned before the war. “Kaiser is a reflective man on the page, with a lively mind,” our critic Dwight Garner writes. “‘Plunder’ has many moods and registers. It acquires moral gravity. It pays tender and respectful attention to forgotten lives. It is also alert to melancholic forms of comedy.”THE TRANSIT OF VENUS, by Shirley Hazzard. (Penguin Books, $18.) Hazzard’s 1980 novel has been reissued with an introduction by Lauren Groff. The plot follows two orphaned Australian sisters who arrive in England in the 1950s. Placid, fair Grace marries a wealthy and officious bureaucrat. Independent, dark-haired Caroline falls in love with an unscrupulous (and attached) man. Hazzard challenges us “to read with an intensity matching her prose,” our critic Parul Sehgal writes. It’s a novel “about our gorgeous and distressing human confidence, the way we march around, plucky protagonists in our minds, armed with horrifyingly partial knowledge of the motivations of those around us.”