9 New Books We Recommend This Week
There are woods near my house where I sometimes head when I’m craving green shadows and stillness, a reminder that time and nature have very little to do with the human scale of things. Very little — but not nothing: As Scott Weidensaul points out in his new book about migratory birds, “A World on the Wing,” humans are deeply implicated in the recent decimation of aviation species. If you love the woods as I do, this book will make you more alert to the chirrups and whistles and flashes of movement in the canopy above you and give you new respect for birds’ incredible abilities. It’s one of our recommended titles this week.We also have a good stack of fiction in store for you, from Haruki Murakami’s latest story collection to Cynthia D’Aprix Sweeney’s satire of Hollywood and marriage to debut novels from JoAnne Tompkins, Sanjena Sathian and Thomas Grattan. In nonfiction, the historian Annette Gordon-Reed takes a turn toward the personal with her book about Texas, “On Juneteenth,” while Simon Heffer revisits the British Empire before World War I and Linda Colley examines the role that constitutions have played in shaping modern governance.Gregory CowlesSenior Editor, BooksTwitter: @GregoryCowlesON JUNETEENTH, by Annette Gordon-Reed. (Liveright, $15.95.) This series of short, moving essays by the noted historian explores “the long road” to June 19, 1865, when the end of legalized slavery was announced in Texas, the state where Gordon-Reed was born and raised. If the book is a more personally revealing departure for Gordon-Reed, it’s still guided by the humane skepticism that has animated her previous work. “One of the things that makes this slender book stand out is Gordon-Reed’s ability to combine clarity with subtlety,” our critic Jennifer Szalai writes. “She leads by example, revisiting her own experiences, questioning her own assumptions — and showing that historical understanding is a process, not an end point.”GOOD COMPANY, by Cynthia D’Aprix Sweeney. (Ecco, $27.99.) Beginning with the discovery of a long-lost wedding ring, Sweeney’s warm, witty novel plumbs the depths of two marriages. Secrets and resentments abound, but loyalty and abiding affection carry this bicoastal tale of actors finding their way in real life. “Sweeney is uncommonly skilled at gently lampooning Hollywood,” Meghan Daum writes in her review. “The constant internal struggle between what the heart wants versus what it should be grateful it already has serves as the primary emotional engine of ‘Good Company.’”