Some of America’s Most Ambitious Women Slept Here
THE BARBIZONThe Hotel That Set Women FreeBy Paulina BrenGrace Kelly lived there before she was famous, and at least once, she danced topless through the halls. A young Sylvia Plath lived there too, and in her semi-autobiographical novel, “The Bell Jar,” she fictionalized it as “The Amazon,” the hotel where her protagonist, Esther Greenwood, stays during a summer magazine internship. Joan Didion stayed there as a 20-year-old on a break from college at Berkeley, beginning her writing career and her time in New York. In her essay “Goodbye to All That,” Didion describes arriving in the city and finding her hotel room freezing cold: Young, naïve and already overwhelmed by New York, she was too afraid to call the front desk to ask for someone to come turn off the air-conditioner. “Was anyone ever so young?” she wrote later. “I am here to tell you that someone was.” Calling her boyfriend back home in California, she told him that she could see the Brooklyn Bridge from her hotel room window. In fact, the bridge was the Queensboro. The hotel was the Barbizon.The Barbizon Hotel for women — the subject of Paulina Bren’s captivating history, “The Barbizon: The Hotel That Set Women Free” — first opened its doors on East 63rd Street in 1928. Prohibition was in full force, and the all-female residents who lived on the hotel’s 23 floors and in its 720 rooms had held the right to vote for less than a decade. A strictly single-sex establishment, the Barbizon forbade men to go beyond the lobby, and this was part of the hotel’s appeal. The women who stayed there — some for only a few days, others for months or years — chose the Barbizon precisely because men were not permitted. The hotel offered exclusivity and an appearance of chaste propriety in an era when the city more broadly, and women’s independence in it in particular, were regarded with suspicion, as full of dangers. By the time the hotel went coed in 1981 (it was converted into condos in 2007), the city had transformed — and with it the strictures of American womanhood that its guests navigated ever so precariously.