Welcome to the Family. Good Luck Fitting In.
THE FOURTH CHILDBy Jessica WinterIn October of 1990, the prime-time newsmagazine “20/20” produced an investigation into the state-run orphanages of Romania, and the horrifying conditions in which tens of thousands of children lived.I was 12 at the time and have a vague memory of my parents calling me into the room to watch, presumably to teach me a lesson in appreciating what I had (them). The children were essentially warehoused in asylums, strapped to beds in dark rooms — and, as a result of neglect, remained toddler-size despite being far older.But the greatest abuse, it struck me then and now, as I go over details in preparation for this review, was the lack of human touch. These children were not held, ever. They were nicknamed Ceausescu’s children, after the Romanian leader Nicolae Ceausescu and his “pro-family” regime that made contraception and abortion illegal in order to grow the Romanian population after World War II. But when families couldn’t afford to keep the children born as a consequence, the babies ended up in these state orphanages, where they were treated like inanimate items in a production line.Jessica Winter’s intense second novel, “The Fourth Child,” centers on the adoption of one of Ceausescu’s children by an average, working-class mother of three from Buffalo. An ardent Catholic and member of a local activist group called Respect Life, Jane Brennan is so moved by the “20/20” coverage that she feels it her duty to go to Romania and bring one of these children home. The feeling Jane has is similar to what Catholics know as a “calling,” a moral imperative that comes directly from God (or, in this case, Barbara Walters); and, for Jane, is tied to feelings of guilt after a miscarriage, her husband’s subsequent vasectomy and her certainty that the child would have been a girl. In a way, Jane has been very consciously performing the role of a good Catholic since adolescence, where we meet her in the book’s opening pages. Adopting one of Ceausescu’s children is her ultimate act of devotion.