Tillie Olsen Captured the Toll of Women’s Labor — on Their Lives and Art
Tillie Olsen’s reputation rests principally on “Tell Me a Riddle,” a collection of three short stories and a novella published in 1961. It was her first book, but Olsen, who was born in 1912, had started writing many years before, and seems to belong, with respect to style and subject matter, as much to the Great Depression as to the Eisenhower Era or the ’60s. The four pieces in “Tell Me a Riddle” are lyrical bulletins of working-class family life, charged with emotional detail and delivered with an attention to the rhythms of consciousness more rigorous and powerful than most of what is called realism.In the first story, “I Stand Here Ironing,” a classic almost from the moment it appeared in “Best American Short Stories of 1957,” we don’t just inhabit the mind of the narrator, a woman reflecting, in the midst of housework, on her daughter’s childhood and her own experience as a mother. Her words, addressed directly to someone — a social worker, a teacher or another well-meaning stranger — land with an almost physical weight. “All that compounds a human being is so heavy and meaningful in me that I cannot endure it tonight,” she says. You can feel the gravity of the words, and the presence of the body that utters them.The woman isn’t named, and her situation is shorn of the kind of references that might situate her in a particular place or time. You could say that she speaks for generations of women who have faced poverty and disappointment. But there is nothing abstract or general about the story she tells — which is mostly the story of how, in a period of hardship and domestic instability, she temporarily gave up custody of her firstborn child — because the difficulty of telling it registers in every sentence. Whenever I reread this story, I’m startled by how little space it takes up: less than 10 pages in the most recent paperback edition, from the University of Nebraska Press. And yet it’s somehow as dense, as rich, as packed with life and feeling and “all that compounds a human being” as something 10 or 100 times as long.The other parts of “Tell Me a Riddle” — “Hey Sailor, What Ship?,” “O Yes” and the long title story — are a bit looser and more discursive, with expansive dialogue and a wider range of characters, but they all share this sense of compression, of experience distilled to a piercing, concentrated essence.