10 New Books We Recommend This Week
We recommend six novels this week, among them a romantic comedy about frozen yogurt, a look at life in the Airbnb age, and the sequel to Viet Thanh Nguyen’s Pulitzer-winning “The Sympathizer.” In nonfiction, we like four books that touch on various aspects of race in America, including a memoir by a Black woman who was raised by white parents, an analysis of the harm that racism inflicts on society at large, and two biographies: one about the notorious white supremacist John C. Calhoun, who served as a senator and vice president in the 19th century, and the other a group biography about the mothers of Malcolm X, Martin Luther King Jr. and James Baldwin.Gregory CowlesSenior Editor, BooksTwitter: @GregoryCowlesTHE COMMITTED, by Viet Thanh Nguyen. (Grove, $27.) The sequel to Nguyen’s Pulitzer Prize-winning novel, “The Sympathizer,” is a deep examination of postcolonial identity disguised as a rollicking thriller, complete with murderous henchmen, drug dealers and a crime boss named the Boss. Nguyen’s narrator tries to escape his past as he navigates the seamy underworld of 1980s Paris. “The narrator’s voice snaps you up,” our critic Dwight Garner writes. “It’s direct, vain, cranky and slashing — a voice of outraged intelligence. It’s among the more memorable in recent American literature.”THE SUM OF US: What Racism Costs Everyone and How We Can Prosper Together, by Heather McGhee. (One World, $28.) “The Sum of Us” makes clear that the primary victims of racism are the people of color who are subjected to it, but McGhee’s book is predicated on the idea that little will change until white people realize what racism has cost them too. She writes about a self-defeating form of exclusion, a determination not to share resources even if the ultimate result is that everyone suffers. It’s an “illuminating and hopeful” work, our critic Jennifer Szalai writes. “There is a striking clarity to this book; there is also a depth of kindness in it that all but the most churlish readers will find moving.”MILK FED, by Melissa Broder. (Scribner, $26.) An entertaining erotic comedy lightly sprinkled with spiritual aperçus, Broder’s second novel features a 20-something factotum at a Los Angeles talent agency who suffers from an eating disorder and finds unlikely salvation in the form of a zaftig Orthodox Jewish yogurt scooper. “‘Milk Fed’ bravely questions the particularly female lionization of thin and loathing of fat, landing on fresh explanations,” Lucinda Rosenfeld writes in her review. The book “is a celebration of bodily liberation … and the ways we keep ourselves chained to others’ ideas of whom and what we ought to look like and long for.”