Her Best Friend Claims They Witnessed a Sex Crime. She Has Her Doubts.
WE RUN THE TIDES By Vendela VidaIs there a better way to come of age than in the first-person plural? Teenage stories take well to a “we.” Think of Jeffrey Eugenides’s “The Virgin Suicides,” narrated in an amorphous chorus of male adolescence, all those neighborhood boys speaking in a single voice of shared desire. The teenage “we” bespeaks an anxiety to belong, a craving for group identity that marks others as outsiders — but also a willingness to issue sweeping judgments and proclamations (“Everyone is going, Mom!”). Maybe no one belongs with so much certainty ever again.“We” is where the heroine begins in “We Run the Tides,” the sixth novel from the Believer co-founder Vendela Vida, and the book follows her as she emerges from this first-person-plural embrace. An eighth grader at a San Francisco girls school in 1984, she bears the unlikely name of Eulabee. “My dad liked a painting of a woman named Eulabee Dix,” she explains in one of the text’s magpie assortment of cultural allusions, this one to an early-20th-century American painter of portrait miniatures. Vida’s Eulabee lives in Sea Cliff, a neighborhood with views of the Golden Gate Bridge. She and her friends walk to school in pleated skirts and middy sailor blouses. They make plans to dress up as the Go-Go’s for Halloween. They call dibs on the boys in a Connecticut school yearbook; they go to the beach in parkas and scramble over rocks between the waves.“When I say ‘we,’ I sometimes mean the four of us Sea Cliff girls who are in eighth grade at the Spragg School for Girls,” Eulabee explains. “But when I say ‘we,’ I always mean Maria Fabiola and me.” Maria Fabiola is the inevitable Hot Friend, a role that is not strictly about looks (though Maria Fabiola is beautiful, and precocious) so much as charisma and danger. Eulabee says of herself and Maria Fabiola: “Separately we are good girls. We behave. Together, some strange alchemy occurs and we are trouble.”One day, a man in a white car stops three of the girls on their way to school, and asks the time. The encounter takes place at an unsettled moment: just as high school has appeared on the horizon, and in the wake of a friend’s father’s death by suicide. Eulabee checks her Swatch and says it’s just after 8. “Did you see that?” Maria Fabiola asks, once they’re out of earshot.