Inside the Mind of an Islamic Extremist
KHALIL By Yasmina Khadra Translated by John CullenYasmina Khadra is the pen name of the French-Algerian author Mohammed Moulessehoul. In 2001 he outed himself as a former Algerian Army officer, with a stint in counterterrorism, who had been writing under his wife’s name to avoid the military censors. It was a surprise worthy of his new novel, “Khalil,” which was published in French (and awarded the Grand Prix of Literary Associations) in 2018. As with his earlier novels, including “The Swallows of Kabul” and “The Attack,” the focus of “Khalil” is on Islamist extremism in particular, and on the inner workings of the radical mind in general. What circumstances will push a man to forsake family and friends, to sacrifice his and others’ lives, out of loyalty to an ideology, motivated by some revered, often distant leader?On Nov. 13, 2015, Paris was rocked by a string of suicide bombings that killed hundreds, and these real-life terrorist attacks form the backdrop of “Khalil.” The book opens as the eponymous protagonist, a 23-year-old Moroccan man living in Belgium, is driving from Brussels to Paris, where he plans to carry out a suicide attack on the Stade de France during a soccer match. “There were four of us suicide bombers, with one mission,” he says on the first page: “to turn the celebration at the Stade de France into global mourning.” The rest of the novel is just as direct and irresistible as this first line — every subsequent sentence, in this translation by John Cullen, is carefully designed to draw you in and lead you into the next one.One of the bombers, a fellow Moroccan-Belgian named Driss, is Khalil’s childhood friend; they were raised in the same apartment building in the slums of Brussels. Driss blows himself up as planned, but Khalil’s suicide vest proves defective. His handlers have mistakenly given him a training vest instead of the real thing. In the ensuing manhunt for the terrorists, colored by racial profiling and an anti-immigrant and anti-Muslim hysteria reminiscent of the atmosphere after 9/11, Khalil holes up in his older sister’s apartment in the Belgian city of Mons. Here he learns that his cousin was one of those hundreds of people who were killed in the very suicide bombings he helped coordinate in Paris. This is not the only case of an “enginer hoist with his own petard,” as Shakespeare would put it; this becomes something of a motif in the novel. Later, Khalil loses someone even closer to him from another suicide bombing in Paris, as a result of which he descends into a crisis of belief.