‘Let the Lord Sort Them: The Rise and Fall of the Death Penalty,’ by Maurice Chammah: An Excerpt
When Danalynn Recer tells the story of her life—or at least of her career, though she seldom makes much of a distinction—she begins with a phone call. At the time, she was an extremely busy twentysomething, working on both a law degree and a master’s in history at the University of Texas at Austin. Some lawyers called the history department and invited her to an office with an oddly vague name: the Texas Resource Center. They represented men on death row, and the name served to camouflage such unpopular work.One of their clients was black and had been sentenced to death for shooting a white man, by an all-white jury, in a county where black men had once been victims of lynching. That last part would not have surprised Recer, since she was writing her master’s thesis on lynchings in Texas. (She was sometimes the only white student in African-American history classes, but she eventually realized that the study of lynching was really, as she later put it, the study of “what the hell is wrong with White people.”) The surprise was that these lawyers thought her research on the past might bolster their modern-day legal claims. She printed out some of her findings on zigzagging dot matrix pages and made her way to an old house downtown, not far from the capitol building.It was a homey warren of little offices, with a big white dry-erase board displaying a calendar of upcoming execution dates. Everywhere you looked, banker’s boxes full of court records were stacked high, overflowing with trial transcripts, police reports, and other documents. Scrawled across the sides of the boxes were the names of death row prisoners. When one received an execution date, the center would try to find him a lawyer, but if they couldn’t, they would jump in themselves.[ Return to the review of “Let the Lord Sort Them.” ]Amid the boxes, young lawyers raced around, speed-reading transcripts, debating which legal claims to make, sending faxes, and fielding calls from colleagues conducting investigations around the state. The lawyers were interested in Recer’s research, but their conversation was cut short: There was a deadline in some other case and they needed to get a document to a FedEx office. Since she had nowhere to be, Recer offered to take it.