Our Autofiction Fixation
In February 2020, at a book party in a Brooklyn brownstone, a smiling stranger walked up to me. “We have something in common, you know,” she said. “We conceived our children without having sex.” My memory of the exchange then goes blank for a moment — I must have spluttered some confused pleasantry in response — but it quickly emerged that she had read my first novel, which explores its protagonist’s struggles with infertility, and drawn the conclusion that I myself had undergone I.V.F., as she had.It was an audacious introduction. But I could not begrudge the assumption she had made, even if I was disoriented by the way she had expressed it. I, too, assume that much of the contemporary fiction I read is autobiographical. Douglas Stuart’s “Shuggie Bain,” which won the Booker Prize, drew openly on the author’s childhood. Ayad Akhtar wrote “Homeland Elegies” in the form of a memoir, and Brandon Taylor, a former doctoral student in biochemistry, called his campus novel “Real Life.” Two of the buzziest books of early 2021, Lauren Oyler’s “Fake Accounts” and Patricia Lockwood’s “No One Is Talking About This,” blur the lines between art and life while deploying the language and brain fugue of internet immersion. None of these books would be caught off-guard by a prying party guest.“Write what you know” has been the novelist’s imperative at least since Charles Dickens retooled fragments of an abandoned memoir for “David Copperfield,” and reached a logical extreme with the autofiction boom of the last decade. The belief that every novel is a self-accounting is timeworn, too: Some early readers of “Lolita” suspected that only someone with the mentality of a child predator could have conjured the depraved Humbert Humbert. Publishers, meanwhile, often appear to want readers to see books as thinly veiled autobiography, and their publicity campaigns typically emphasize authors’ personal connections to their work. This can backfire, as with the P.R. blitz for Jeanine Cummins’s border-crisis blockbuster “American Dirt,” which exaggerated the author’s Latina heritage and suggested that her husband is an undocumented Central American immigrant (he’s from Ireland).Some of the boldest and most exciting novels of recent years have taken the autobiographical assumption and everything knit up in it — the nature of truth, the boundaries between what is real and what is imagined — as a shadow theme. The first third of Susan Choi’s “Trust Exercise” steeps itself in the horny adolescent drama of a performing-arts high school modeled in part on the one Choi herself attended in Houston in the 1980s. Then, however, Choi raises another curtain and yet another, her book shape-shifting into a dazzling metafiction on authorship and self-performance. From the opening pages of “The Need,” Helen Phillips, a mother of two, captures the sticky overwhelm of early parenthood — the engorged breasts, the toddler mayhem — with diaristic, feels-real precision. But from the jump, Phillips’s book is also operating in the realms of science fiction and body horror, becoming a wondrously demented commentary on the slipperiness and duality of the maternal state.