11 New Books We Recommend This Week
I heard from an old friend the other day, whose livelihood and whole way of life have been disrupted by the pandemic. It’s not all bad news, though: Among other things, he writes, he has detached from the internet “almost entirely” and is “fleeing into study of 15th-century Italy.” That’s been his Covid silver lining; mine has been less time on the train and more time reading on the beach. Hey, it’s work.We don’t have any books on 15th-century Italy to recommend this week — sorry, Chris! — but we do have a couple that should encourage you to spend less time online: Alec MacGillis’s “Fulfillment” takes a hard look at Amazon’s impact on America’s culture and communities, and Kevin Roose’s “Futureproof” examines the ways technology controls us instead of vice versa. We also like a study of Pittsburgh’s shift from steel to health care, a history of the Barbizon women’s hotel in Manhattan and a deep dive into the most fundamental question of life science: What is life?In fiction, our recommended books include a career-spanning selection of stories from the venerable John Edgar Wideman, a novel of transnational adoption by Jessica Winter and four exciting debuts, about everything from chickens to 1970s pop music.Gregory CowlesSenior Editor, BooksTwitter: @GregoryCowlesYOU MADE ME LOVE YOU: Selected Stories, 1981-2018, by John Edgar Wideman. (Scribner, $30.) Postindustrial Pittsburgh is the locus of many of Wideman’s novels and memoirs, and its texture and sociology burn a hole through the stories in this collection. In them, the healing richness of family life, and of family stories, renders unbearable experiences bearable. Wideman’s narrators “remain in close emotional contact with the cringing, the alienation, the clowning, the wariness, the self-mistrust and self-satire that came with growing up poor and Black in Pittsburgh,” our critic Dwight Garner writes. “Wideman’s stories have a wary, brooding spirit, a lonely intelligence. They carry a real but atrophied affection for America.”