‘This Is the Fire: What I Say to My Friends About Racism,’ by Don Lemon: An Excerpt
A comfortable two-hour drive from the Midtown headquarters of CNN, not far from the Sag Harbor home I share with my fiancé, Tim, a truncated boardwalk path cuts through the dune grass and gives way to tawny sand on the beach at Sag Harbor Bay. A stone marker at the trailhead honors the founder of this extraordinary enclave, an African American neighborhood on prime beachfront real estate.“In grateful recognition of Maude K. Terry,” it says. “Do I but dream.”Docile green waves lap at the shore where Indigenous people, the Shinnecock, withstood bleak pre-Columbian winters and bloody raids by the neighboring Pequot until Europeans arrived on the continent in the 1500s, bringing Bibles and smallpox. The Shinnecock had no immunity to the virus, of course, and little energy left over to resist the Holy Spirit. Two-thirds of their population was wiped out within a few years. Able-bodied survivors went to work on Melvillesque whaling vessels, some of which were outfitted for the clandestine purpose of “blackbirding”: the acquisition, by coercion or outright kidnapping, of Indigenous people from faraway islands and coastal regions to labor on cotton and sugar plantations in Europe and the Colonies.In July 1619, legislative representatives from eleven large New World settlements met in Jamestown, Virginia, to establish the standards and practices that would lay a foundation for the democracy they aspired to build. One month later, at nearby Point Comfort, about two dozen Angolan men and women were offloaded and sold by Portuguese slave traders. Thus the dream of democracy and the nightmare of slavery were born in the same urgent breath, and there was never a time when White people, as a monolith, were comfortable with it. There were always agitators and conscientious objectors; they just couldn’t summon the traction needed to overcome the landed gentry and wealthy industrialists who depended on free labor for their beefy bottom line.[ Return to review of “This Is the Fire.” ] Fast-forward a century and a half. An early draft of the Declaration of Independence condemned slavery as “piratical warfare” and an “assemblage of horrors” — a “cruel war against human nature itself” — but 33-year-old Thomas Jefferson and his young allies were shouted down by older, more pragmatic voices who agreed in theory with all that “inalienable rights” jazz but argued that their cotton wasn’t going to pick itself. If there was any discussion of extending these rights to women of any color, it has vanished from history. The document was revised to a “sorry, not sorry” declaration of the independence of White men.