The Babysitter Knows All
MARY JANEBy Jessica Anya BlauIt’s 1975, and Mary Jane Dillard is growing up in a perfectly neat house in Baltimore’s Roland Park neighborhood with a picture of President Ford hanging on the wall. Before dinner, her father says grace, giving thanks for “his wonderful wife and obedient child.” But the 14-year-old takes a summer job as a nanny for a different sort of family in Jessica Anya Blau’s delightful novel. Five-year-old Izzy shouts in ALL CAPS. Izzy’s mother, Mrs. Cone, doesn’t wear a bra, and her father, Dr. Cone, is a psychiatrist and a Jew — “another breed of human,” as Mary Jane’s father explains. When a rock star and his singer-actress wife come to stay for intensive addiction therapy, Mary Jane learns some new words and concepts. It’s a schematic setup — strait-laced suburbanites versus groovy artists — but this book works because it’s got a great protagonist.Unlike many young narrators, Mary Jane is neither angry nor rebellious nor twisted. She is a responsible girl who is “still happy helping my mother with the chores in the house,” singing show tunes and “making a simple dessert featured in Good Housekeeping.” This churchgoing teenager is innocent, but her innocence is powerful. While the summer changes her, Mary Jane changes the people she encounters as well. She introduces structure and stability to her young charge. Baths! Bedtime stories! She organizes the house and cooks dinner, charming her hard-rocking housemates Jimmy and Sheba — and the reader too. If this is a coming-of-age story, it is also a story of self-possession and common sense.Bighearted and retro in its setting and music, this novel has the bouncy rhythm of classic television. We’ve got the sitcom-perfect suburb with paint colors “dictated by the neighborhood association,” the secret guests and the nosy neighbor, Beanie Jones, combined with a cooking show and a bit of “Hoarders.” (“At last, four Hefty bags were full and lined up in the dining room.”) Blau is a deft hand with comic juxtaposition and domestic fantasy. She keeps it light, she keeps it moving and she’s got terrific visuals. We can picture Mary Jane dressing for church in her “blue floral headband,” Izzy “eating her porridge naked” — and, in a scene worthy of Nick Hornby, Sheba and Jimmy showing up in “matching black pixie-cut wigs” in the back row of church to listen to Mary Jane sing.[ Read an excerpt from “Mary Jane.” ]There are moments when the plot feels farfetched. Would it really be possible — or remotely professional — for Dr. Cone to treat a rock star at home for an entire summer? Would Mary Jane’s controlling mother really know so little about her daughter’s employers? And would she keep her distance for as long as she does — despite living just a short walk away? Some of the primary-colored characters could use a little shading. Mary Jane’s father is constantly holding a newspaper. Izzy is constantly making adorable verbal mistakes — “veterinarian” for vegetarian, “mary rose” for rosemary, “polar bear photo” for Polaroid, “centerplace” for centerpiece. By the time she says “sidetrack” for soundtrack, these malapropisms become too much of a cute thing.