Puberty, Slut-Shaming and Cuddle Parties in Melissa Febos’s ‘Girlhood’
GIRLHOOD EssaysBy Melissa FebosNearly a decade ago Melissa Febos reflected on her decision to publish her debut memoir, “Whip Smart,” under her own name and not a pseudonym: “It didn’t stop people from thinking of me as a former sex worker who also happened to write a book about it, instead of a writer who happened to tell the story of her own experience in sex work.” Nobody disrespects Febos anymore. Her 2017 autobiographical collection, “Abandon Me,” about a toxic love affair, her birth father and the sea captain who raised her, was a finalist for the Lambda Literary Award and on many “best books of the year” lists. The former professional dominatrix now teaches nonfiction at Iowa.Febos’s ambitious new collection, “Girlhood,” comprises eight essays about growing up in a female body that reached sexual development at the age of 11. “It was a race that I had won without trying,” she writes, “and to win it was the greatest loss of all.” The book is a feminist testament to survival: years of dehumanizing sex with boys and men, harassment by women, being stalked, drug addiction and what she describes as “a growing certainty about the ways in which I have collaborated in the mistreatment of my own body.” The story she tells is not just her own: Febos interviewed many other women about their sex lives and incorporated these testimonies into a far-reaching narrative.Febos revisits her own girlhood in the style of a collage, interweaving her memories with snippets from her omnivorous reading. She includes six pages of source notes, and draws from Lacan, Kimberlé Crenshaw, Samuel Johnson. Lily Bart’s “ruin” in Edith Wharton’s novel “The House of Mirth” reminds Febos of how her classmates hated her for having what they wanted — a woman’s body. As a believer in animal rights, she identifies with a caged orangutan named Jenny; and she’s obsessed with cruel psychological experiments on nonhumans, such as Harry Harlow’s rhesus monkeys, deprived of touch for a year.[ Read an excerpt from “Girlhood.” ]Yet Febos isn’t relentlessly grim. In “The Mirror Test,” she riffs ingeniously on the expression “loose as a goose,” which other kids used to slut-shame her. The geese in their town left droppings everywhere, she recalls. “Sometimes they flew in a V formation, their muscular wings beating in unison, their bodies’ improbable masses gliding over us in an arrow, honking as they sliced into the sky.” Then, after she masturbates, these literal geese are transformed into a portrait of the writer as a young woman: “I felt loose as a goose alone in my bedroom, my magnificent wings beating the air, flapping the pages of all my books.”