The Love Triangle That Caused a Religious Panic
DOOMED ROMANCEBroken Hearts, Lost Souls, and Sexual Tumult in Nineteenth-Century AmericaBy Christine Leigh HeyrmanThe historian Christine Leigh Heyrman’s “Doomed Romance: Broken Hearts, Lost Souls, and Sexual Tumult in Nineteenth-Century America” may seem at first like a charming confection, a droll tale of an early-19th-century New England love triangle involving moony aspirational missionaries who get all wrapped up in what we would now call their “feels.” It is that. But in Heyrman’s telling, it becomes far more, as she remorselessly dissects the fragile male selfhood at the heart of evangelical Protestantism and its “vexed relationship with ideals of manhood.” Since the needs of that self are ever devouring the American body religious and politic, an exploration of its origins deserves attention.“Doomed Romance” reads like a bodice-ripper, less “Bridgerton” than Lady Gaga’s “Bad Romance.” Fewer push-up bras, plenty of smoldering letters. Heyrman, who admits to “a taste for low gossip,” was transfixed by her discovery of a cache of salacious documents, preserved as part of an extralegal investigation into a young woman who, in 1826, dropped one fiancé for another. She was Martha Parker, a comely middle-class lass “possessed of many charms.” No portrait survives, but she seems to have inspired more than the usual ardor. She is “no Everywoman,” Heyrman instructs us, yet representative of white Northern ladies serving as teachers and missionaries, enjoying a softer life than the lower classes who labored on farms or in mills.Pursuing her were several self-righteously pious and overenthusiastic suitors: Thomas Tenney, studying to be a minister; Elisha Jenney, a Dartmouth student who takes disappointment poorly; and, finally, the stalwart and wonderfully named Elnathan Gridley, a Yale graduate preparing to minister to the heathen of Palestine. Part of a “culture of entitlement,” Tenney and Jenney were connected to Dartmouth and all three to the evangelical community. Had Martha bruised the egos of lesser beings, her behavior might have passed without notice. But these were men of God.