The Cant-Free Elegance of Jenny Diski’s Irresistible Mind
WHY DIDN’T YOU JUST DO WHAT YOU WERE TOLD?EssaysBy Jenny DiskiI’ve never been quite sure what the phrase “an acquired taste” is supposed to mean — I presume it has something to do with the subject (a writer) or object (red wine) in question not being immediately accessible or likable — but I would venture that the phrase applies to the British novelist and essayist Jenny Diski. Most critics, whatever their leanings or however widely they range, have a signature style. Diski, by contrast, can’t be easily placed: Her tone can be acidic and dismissive but it can also be empathic and tolerant; sometimes it can seem removed and arbitrary and at other times passionately engaged. In other words, one is never quite sure which Diski one will get. This makes for a singular reading experience, in which one watches an opinion take shape or a verdict bloom as it is happening.Diski, whose name should be more recognized on these shores than it is, had a large literary presence in England. At the time of her death from cancer in 2016 at the age of 68, she had written a collection of stories and 10 novels — the first, “Nothing Natural” (1986), is a daring and vivid account of a sadomasochistic affair that sounds distinctly autobiographical (she was almost 40 when it was published) — as well as eight books of nonfiction, which toggled back and forth between memoir and travelogue or meditation. Although most of her books, especially “What I Don’t Know About Animals” (2010) and “Skating to Antarctica” (1997), received positive notices, she was best known for the more than 200 essays she contributed to The London Review of Books from 1992 to 2015. She continued writing until very near the end, keeping a kind of anticancer diary in which she also explored her chaotic past and complex relationship with the writer Doris Lessing, with whom she lived for several years beginning when she was 15. These essays were published in a volume with the somewhat ironic title “In Gratitude” shortly before Diski’s death.With the posthumous publication of “Why Didn’t You Just Do What You Were Told?,” a collection of 33 essays that have been culled and introduced by Mary-Kay Wilmers, the former editor of The London Review of Books (she stepped down in February) and a good friend of Diski, her reputation as an original, witty and cant-free thinker on the way we live now should be given a significant boost. Her prose is elegant and amused, as if to counter her native melancholia (which she describes un-self-pityingly as “a small shiver of bleakness” or a “tiny blueness”), and includes frequent dips into memorable images: “I make regular trips to the fridge to gaze on its cosmic emptiness. I adore its lit-up vacancy.”