How to Help Endangered and Impoverished Peoples
THE FRONTLINES OF PEACEAn Insider’s Guide to Changing the WorldBy Séverine AutesserreThe Barnard professor Séverine Autesserre was several deployments into her career as an international aid worker when she realized something was wrong with what she calls “Peaceland.” Whether in Afghanistan, Congo or Kosovo, she was struck by the sameness of her world. She was barely allowed to leave her fortified compound — too dangerous. When she did go out, it was often in the passenger seat of a chauffeured car, which gave her motion sickness and prevented her from getting to know her neighbors. Autesserre was ostensibly in “the field” to help those afflicted by wars, disease and poverty, but she communicated with few civilians. Instead, she schmoozed with politicians, foreign soldiers and other aid workers, and drew from her limited pre-existing knowledge of the country to write up reports for her bosses, who were mostly abroad.“We responded to cholera epidemics, took care of orphans, provided health care to wounded people and rape survivors,” she writes in “The Frontlines of Peace.” “We did not do anything to actually prevent entire populations from starving, children from being orphaned, women from being raped and civilians from being displaced.” When she and her colleagues did try to resolve the causes of systemic violence, they leaned on pushing “agreements between world leaders and elites, along with national elections” — textbook strategies that almost invariably fail because they do not take into account the needs of the people they’re supposed to serve.The causes of violence, Autesserre reminds us, vary from village to village and from state to state. To end conflicts both big and small, she says, the aid industry must turn to guerrilla-like peacekeeping strategies that combine hyperlocal knowledge of populations and terrain with reconciliation strategies led by ordinary people.Autesserre’s portrayal of the aid industry is vivid and damning — with a few exceptions, the citizens of Peaceland come off as clueless at best, downright racist at worst (even so, you can tell Autesserre is exercising restraint). “Imagine if I were to tell you that the United Nations had tasked a conflict-resolution expert from, say, Kazakhstan with ending gun violence in Baltimore, but that neither this expert nor any of her bosses were familiar with American racial politics, police-community relationships in the United States’ inner cities, debates over the right to bear arms or even spoke English,” she writes. “You would think this is absurd, wouldn’t you?”