In James Merrill’s Letters, a Workshop and a Stage for the Poet’s Wit
A WHOLE WORLDLetters From James MerrillEdited by Langdon Hammer and Stephen YenserWhen he was 25 and traveling abroad, the poet James Merrill (1926-95) learned that his mother had destroyed letters he’d been sent from several different men, fearing that they presented her son with a “threat of exposure.” Recounting this incident in “A Different Person” (1993), his too-little-known autobiography, Merrill pointed out how “it never occurred to the alarmists that a person who made no secret of his life was a sorry target for blackmail.” As years passed and his romantic activity remained forthright and far-flung, his mother became, for the most part, “forbearance itself.” She is one of her son’s many correspondents in the six decades’ worth of letters that now fill “A Whole World,” a cosmopolitan, bejeweled and philosophical chronicle of friendship, love, sex and work.Not long before his death, Merrill joked about having been able to pursue his poetic vocation free from the usual yoke of academic labor: “I am seldom credited with the invention of the Reverse Sabbatical — a year of instruction followed by six of repose.” He taught only when he wished, thanks to the fortune amassed by his father, Charles E. Merrill, whose famous investment company grew mightily by underwriting grocery stores and five-and-dimes. When young Jimmy signed his first publishing contract with Knopf in 1950, the senior Merrill telephoned his congratulations, imagining that his son “felt as he did on the day of his big McCrory deal.” Charles Merrill’s life, as robustly heterosexual as Jimmy’s was gay, became the basis for James Merrill’s first novel, “The Seraglio” (1957).“A Whole World” gives us glimpses and assessments of Merrill’s poetic elders (Marianne Moore is “pure enchantment” and Elizabeth Bishop’s work “entirely spatterproof”), as well as his contemporaries (the Beats seem mostly ridiculous and Sylvia Plath “doesn’t grab me all that much”), and then eventually his disciples (among them the late J. D. McClatchy and Agha Shahid Ali). Uncomfortable writing “critical prose” (“my fingers have never learned the stops of that flute”), Merrill found that letters, in which one can get away with an aperçu instead of a whole argument, suited him better than essays. Quick comparative literary judgments became an epistolary specialty: “when she is good + sick from Durrell’s sticky liqueurs, have her try ‘The Towers of Trebizond’ by Rose Macaulay at 80 — the driest champagne.”The letters provide a gloss on his own main poetic achievement, “The Changing Light at Sandover,” a cozily heroic production that sprang from the Ouija board communications he and his life partner, David Jackson, received from spirits in the afterlife. Their first guide in that realm — Ephraim, a Greek Jew born eight years after Christ — shows up in the letters as if he were a neighbor or travel companion: “He’s hugely enjoying the whole trip” that Merrill and Jackson take to Asia during 1956-57. When the great distance from home keeps Merrill from attending his father’s funeral, Ephraim, with his Ariel-like mobility, seems to attend it for him, reporting that he’s seen Charles Merrill “looking about 32, in a green suit, surrounded by pretty women.” The poet muses on the idea that “a life’s work may very well be the construction of a bridge back” to one’s past; the Ouija board’s planchette (he and Jackson used a teacup) was Merrill’s vehicle across that. Some friends and colleagues were skeptical of a poetic enterprise that seemed to recall Yeats’s automatic writing, but the letters show Merrill’s ever-increasing confidence and pride in what he realizes has become the “epic project” his first lover once recommended he find.