Get to Know Your Larynx. Then Make Some Noise.
THIS IS THE VOICEBy John ColapintoAs a genre, body part nonfiction would seem to have run its course. We have natural histories of the heart and brain, the skin, the sensory organs. The intestines have a best seller. The penis has a cultural history, and the vagina has its own bible. But wait, you are probably not thinking, where is the 300-page book devoted to the larynx?It has arrived, and it is exemplary. The author, the New Yorker staff writer John Colapinto, is an amateur rock vocalist with a polyp on his cords. “This Is the Voice” begins with his story, but quickly charges off in surprising and consistently fascinating directions. I did not, for example, expect: national elocutionists, Kim Kardashian’s vocal fry, the last Vatican castrato, the telling silence of lizards, Alexa or the delightful, data-based revelation that humans can reliably hear a smile.Colapinto makes the case that our larynx — the human voice box — may well be the most important boost evolution bestowed. At its most basic, vocalization requires two pieces of equipment: lungs and vocal cords. For both these items, we have the lungfish to thank. Their lungs evolved from their swim bladder — the internal pool float that helps them hold to a certain depth. The walls of lungfish bladders in particular are so thin that oxygen can pass through them into the blood. Vocal cords evolved as a valve to keep water out of these proto-lungs. Lungfish vocalizations are on a par with the sounds of air escaping the mouth of a balloon. “I am trying to avoid the word ‘farts,’” Colapinto says nobly, “but I’m afraid those were the first vocal sounds heard on earth.”Speech is, of course, more than vocalization. It’s not just a matter of having the equipment, the author explains, it’s a matter of where it sits. With the shift to upright locomotion, the larynx began to descend — from the back of the mouth down into the throat, where there’s room to create more varied phonemes. The larynx of Neanderthal man, like the larynx of those great orators the chimpanzees, sat higher than our own. This, Colapinto argues, kept them from producing the more gymnastic vowels and sound combinations that set language apart from utterance.