When the Hand That Rocks the Cradle Is Suspicious of the Baby Inside
THE PUSHBy Ashley AudrainIs my child’s behavior normal? It’s a parenting question for the ages, particularly at a time when a certain type of parent (present company included) frets over every childhood quirk, no matter how mundane. Does the preschooler with a predilection for hitting need a professional intervention, or maybe just a taekwondo class? Is the kid who drops naps but not tantrums a future rageaholic? This sort of hand-wringing, at its most extreme, is at the center of Ashley Audrain’s taut, chilling debut novel, “The Push.”Blythe Connor is reluctant to become a parent — understandably so. Her own mother abandoned her when she was 11, after years of cruelty. Her grandmother, also abusive, departed in a more gruesome way: by hanging herself from a tree in the front yard. Blythe is primed, perhaps even genetically programmed, for maternal struggle. “I think the baby hates me,” she says just days after giving birth to her first child, a daughter named Violet. Their relationship goes downhill from there.Blythe’s postpartum experience is familiar, and Audrain renders it flawlessly. Breastfeeding isn’t a spontanous success, for one thing; a nurse “stood over us and stared at Violet and my huge brown nipple as she tried to latch again.” Blythe struggles to adapt to motherhood and she sees seismic shifts in her relationship to her husband, Fox. Noticeably absent is any sense of joy or wonder. “I was so disappointed she was mine,” Blythe says of Violet. She admits to ignoring her baby’s cries for hours on end.It would be easy to chalk up these difficulties to postpartum depression if it weren’t for the periodic reminders of Blythe’s traumatic family history, woven through the book in stand-alone chapters. Blythe’s mother hit her and often disappeared for a night or two at a time. Blythe’s grandmother routinely locked Blythe’s mother out of the house after school and once held her head underwater in the bathtub, nearly drowning her.