Kristen Radtke Considers Another American Epidemic: Loneliness
I started writing about loneliness by accident. It seems too simple to say I wrote about loneliness because I was often lonely, although I was. It was 2016, during an election cycle that left many of us feeling wrenched from reality, and suddenly I was seeing loneliness everywhere. I’d walk down the street or step onto the subway during my morning commute and find that I couldn’t stop watching people who were physically alone: someone eating a sloppy gyro on the curb while staring blankly into space, an exhausted nurse still in her scrubs nodding off on the bus, the bodega cashier scrolling absently through his phone before a backdrop of condoms and Fritos pinned to the wall. There was nothing verifiably lonely about any of these people, and the fact that I identified loneliness in them said a lot more about me than it did them. I wanted to see their loneliness because I was feeling it myself.So I started to draw. I drew people pacing in parking lots, asleep on the subway, glimpsed through their apartment windows. I thought for a time that this was as far as the project would go, but as I kept drawing, I realized I had questions I couldn’t answer. Was there a difference between being alone and being lonely? Why don’t we talk about our loneliness very often? What is loneliness, exactly, and why do we feel it at all?I began reading books with titles like “Alone Together” and “The Lonely American” and “Loneliness as a Way of Life,” along with a whole slew of scientific and self-help books I’d have been embarrassed to be seen reading in the public spaces I was drawing. Every book brought with it more questions, and the project got broader: How is loneliness depicted in pop culture? What’s the connection between loneliness and violence? What about politics? What about gender? What actually happens to our bodies when we’re isolated for too long, and, in a country that prides itself on individualism and privacy hedges, how do we fix it?What I found was much worse than I’d imagined. Basically: Loneliness will kill you. Lonely people are more likely to have heart attacks and cancer and alcoholism and even common colds. Loneliness can make you assume the worst in others and see enemies in harmless strangers, and instill a creeping paranoia about your unlovability. Loneliness is an emergency. I spent nearly three years fixated on the problems that I thought isolated Americans most: our insistence on individualism, our unrelenting attitudes toward work, our cavernous political divides. I wrote about the cold contours of the internet, theories about raising socially adjusted children and how gun violence partitions us in fear. Then, as public spaces emptied out and malls and schools closed during the first lockdown in 2020, there were no longer any masses. Individualism crumbled as a concept, and those who clung to it were jeered; we were reminded that we are only as healthy as the sickest among us. Mutual aid groups formed, and we again recognized what we owe one another as human beings. And still, we were lonelier than ever.