Once Too Radical for Italy, Goliarda Sapienza Is Belatedly Getting Her Due
Goliarda Sapienza yearned for an audience. An actress turned writer at the cusp of middle age, and now considered a feminist icon in her native Italy, she felt that telling one’s story is what gives existence meaning. “Life is always a novel left unwritten if we leave it buried inside of us, and I believe in literature,” she wrote in MEETING IN POSITANO (Other Press, paper, $15.99), a characteristically intense work of autofiction, set in the 1950s on the Amalfi coast.Composed in the 1980s, the novel, like most of Sapienza’s work, was published only after her death, appearing in Italy in 2015, and now, for the first time, in the United States, in a translation by Brian Robert Moore. Chronicling the friendship between Sapienza, at the time a militant filmmaker, and the fictional Erica, a charming bon vivant — loosely inspired by an actual acquaintance — who has retired to Positano after amassing a small fortune via dubious means, the novel is an ode to sisterhood, though not without an overlay of homoerotic tension. (Sapienza, who was bisexual, falls in love with Erica, who does not reciprocate.) It’s also a homage to the stunning beauty of the Neapolitan coast at the dawn of mass tourism. “Positano can cure you of anything,” Erica says. “It opens your eyes to your past suffering and illuminates your present ones, often saving you from making further mistakes.” She goes on: “I get the impression that this cove protected by the bastion of mountains at its back forces you to look at yourself square in the face, like a ‘mirror of truth.’”Sapienza had a taste for ornate characterizations — the nights are filled with “melodious smells of jasmine and herbs coming from the countless gardens”; the sea is “a burning glass that for hours and hours sets aflame the whites and pinks of the houses” — sometimes to a fault. This is how she describes rum babas arriving at her table for breakfast: “With the gestures of an ancient god, the great pastry chef carries the fruits of his alchemy over which he and his sorcerer’s apprentices have labored down in their underground chamber scented with baking powder and cinnamon.”