Following the Trail of a Nazi Mass Murderer Who Was Never Caught
THE RATLINEThe Exalted Life and Mysterious Death of a Nazi FugitiveBy Philippe SandsIn his brilliant, deeply moving 2016 book “East West Street,” Philippe Sands wove the story of his own Eastern European Jewish family with those of two jurists who forged the legal framework for the Nuremberg trials: Hersch Lauterpacht, who put forth the concept of “crimes against humanity,” and Raphael Lemkin, who coined the term “genocide.” Both men and Sands’s maternal grandfather hailed from Lemberg — now Lviv, in Ukraine — and all had relatives slaughtered in the Holocaust. His latest book, “The Ratline,” is a gripping sequel.This time around, Sands, a human rights lawyer, follows the trail of a big fish who was never caught: Otto Wächter, a high-ranking Nazi official in occupied Poland who was indicted on a charge of mass murder after the war, but escaped. Wächter had been chosen by Hitler himself to govern Galicia and on his watch the Krakow ghetto was constructed and more than 130,000 people from the area, including 8,000 children, died in death camps. After the war, while much of the Nazi high command wound up at Nuremberg — tried, convicted and hanged — Wächter spent more than three years hiding in the Austrian Alps before escaping to Rome. He died there in 1949 in mysterious circumstances under the assumed name of Reinhardt, given last rites by a prominent Austrian Catholic bishop who had helped him in Rome — entirely aware of his identity, sympathetic to his cause and well connected at the Vatican.Wächter had crossed the Alps on foot in the snow and made his way to Rome, where he lived in a religious residence. He had intended to flee to South America via the so-called “Ratline,” the clandestine network that helped many prominent Nazis evade justice with the aid of Catholic Church officials, some perhaps even inside the Vatican. Sometimes, Sands discovers in his research, the Ratline had the implicit or explicit support of the United States, which valued these men’s intelligence about the growing Soviet threat and turned a blind eye to their murderous pasts. This is the swampy world of postwar Rome in which Wächter died, believing himself “to be hunted by Americans, Poles, Soviets and Jews,” as Sands writes.[ Read an excerpt from “The Ratline.” ]In truth, this book’s title is a bit of a misnomer. “The Ratline” is less about the escape route per se than about Wächter’s life and times — his education in Austria, his rise through the ranks of the Nazi Party, his courtship of and marriage to Charlotte Bleckmann, a bright, well-educated art student. “The Ratline” is a Nazi love story, but a fascinating and important one, told in vivid detail because Sands was able to make use of an extraordinary cache of documents: thousands of pages of personal papers and diaries, and years of correspondence between Otto and Charlotte. While Wächter was busy overseeing the deportation of Galicia’s Jews, and then in hiding between 1945 and 1949, the two wrote to each other using lovey-dovey nicknames.