9 New Books We Recommend This Week
Politics provide a through line for some of this week’s recommended books, from the focused activism of the early AIDS era (in Sarah Schulman’s “Let the Record Show”) to the history of government efforts to fight monopoly power (in Senator Amy Klobuchar’s “Antitrust”) to the plot of Richard Wright’s resurrected novel “The Man Who Lived Underground,” in which the Black protagonist is wrongly accused of murder.Also up: a group biography of the women who helped get National Public Radio off the ground in the 1970s, a meditation on the Renaissance artist Albrecht Dürer, a memoir of a marriage-ending affair, and new fiction from Stephen Mack Jones, Cynthia Ozick and Jeff VanderMeer.Gregory CowlesSenior Editor, BooksTwitter: @GregoryCowlesLET THE RECORD SHOW: A Political History of ACT UP New York, 1987-1993, by Sarah Schulman. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $40.) Schulman is a former member of AIDS Coalition to Unleash Power, the influential direct-action group committed to ending AIDS. Her new book is based on 17 years of interviews she conducted with nearly 200 members of the organization. She sets her history in New York in the years between 1987 and 1993, when the Monday night meetings at a downtown lesbian and gay community center attracted hundreds. “‘Let the Record Show’ doesn’t seek to memorialize history but to ransack it, to seize what we might need,” our critic Parul Sehgal writes. “This is not reverent, definitive history. This is a tactician’s bible.”ALBERT AND THE WHALE: Albrecht Dürer and How Art Imagines Our World, by Philip Hoare. (Pegasus, $28.95.) The central figure of Hoare’s latest project is the German artist Albrecht Dürer, but the book is a summary-defying blend of art history, biography, nature writing and memoir. “Hoare writes with the license of the nonexpert; you can feel the delight he takes in being unbound by anything but his enthusiasms,” our reviewer John Williams writes. “He is alternately precise and concealing. His biographical sections are both elliptical and redolent of entire lives. His art criticism is often stirring.”