Punctuated Poetry and Other Letters to the Editor
To the Editor:Too bad W. S. Merwin isn’t around to take the other side regarding Elisa Gabbert’s effusive praise of “punctuation as a superpower and a secret weapon” in her Jan. 3 On Poetry column. Merwin stopped punctuating his poems in 1988. He said that he felt that punctuation “stapled” the language to the page. “I think punctuation is prose. We don’t punctuate our speech, and we don’t punctuate when we sing,” Merwin said. “Poetry always has to have one foot in song and in speech.”While I do not agree that all punctuation ought to be removed from poetry — periods, commas and a rare exclamation mark are really all poets need — I do think that poetry ought not be written with a staple gun.J. R. Solonche Blooming Grove, N.Y.To the Editor:Based on Andrew Sullivan’s fine review of “Conservatism,” by Edmund Fawcett (Jan. 3), I’m looking forward to reading it. However, he did slide in one sentence I can’t let pass without correction. In commenting on Burke’s work, Sullivan states, “But what liberal democracy eroded — the authority of religion, the coherence of a community, a sense of collective belonging, home, meaning and security — could prompt far more radical responses.” That would be an appalling indictment of liberal democracy, if it were true. What liberal democracy expends great energy attempting to erode is the claimed supremacy of religion, in particular Christianity; the insularity of a community; a sense of collective intolerance; exclusion; truncated meaning and false security. All of which stand at the door, rifle in hand, against a more perfect union.Susan E. Mullendore Tucson, Ariz.♦To the Editor:In the second paragraph of his review of “Conservatism,” Andrew Sullivan writes, “A defense of the status quo against disruption comes naturally to anyone truly comfortable in the world.” A dozen pages later, in the second paragraph of her review of Rachel Holmes’s new biography, “Sylvia Pankhurst,” Francesca Wade repeats the following quote from Pankhurst’s address to the court during her 1921 sedition trial: “It is wrong that people like you should be comfortable and well fed, while all around you people are starving.” (Italics in both quotes mine.)