8 New Books We Recommend This Week
Sometimes a book sells itself: Oh, Kazuo Ishiguro’s new novel is a mournful allegory about artificial intelligence and the challenges of human connection? Sign me up, please! (But even if you’re on the same page, do make time to read Radhika Jones’s lovely review of the book; you’ll be glad you did.) Other times a good review makes all the difference. That was the case this week with Mary Roach’s wonderful take on “This Is the Voice,” by John Colapinto, an in-depth nonfiction book about the larynx. Trust me, you’ll want to read it after you read the review.No? That’s OK, we’re all about options. We also suggest a couple of memoirs, one by the psychologist Sherry Turkle and one by the journalist Theo Padnos about his two-year captivity in Syria. We recommend a study of fashion and its cultural significance over the last millennium or so, and — going back further still — a history of soldiers in the Roman Army. And in fiction, along with the Ishiguro, we also like Susan Conley’s “Landslide” and Angie Thomas’s “Concrete Rose,” a prequel to “The Hate U Give” that puts Starr Carter’s father, Maverick, front and center.Gregory CowlesSenior Editor, BooksTwitter: @GregoryCowlesTHE EMPATHY DIARIES: A Memoir, by Sherry Turkle. (Penguin Press, $28.) Turkle is a clinical psychologist and a thinker about the ethics of technology and online life who has taught for decades at M.I.T. In this memoir, written with a warm, intimate voice, she writes about growing up in postwar Brooklyn in a semi-observant Jewish family. She evokes the hothouse atmosphere at Radcliffe and Harvard in the late 1960s, when she was an undergraduate. She writes about studying in Paris in the early 1970s, when she got to know the controversial French psychoanalyst Jacques Lacan. “The Empathy Diaries” is a “beautiful book,” our critic Dwight Garner writes. “It has gravity and grace; it’s as inexorable as a fable; it drills down into the things that make a life; it works to make sense of existence on both its coded and transparent levels; it feels like an instant classic of the genre.”KLARA AND THE SUN, by Kazuo Ishiguro. (Knopf, $28.) Klara, the solar-powered humanoid who narrates the Nobelist Ishiguro’s powerful eighth novel, is an “Artificial Friend,” purchased as a companion to a sickly teenage girl. Through the robot’s eyes, and haunting mechanical voice, we encounter a near future in which technology, ominously, has begun to render humans themselves obsolete. Klara’s perception “is at once mechanical and deeply subjective,” Radhika Jones writes in her review. “Seeing the world from Klara’s point of view is to be reminded constantly of what it looks like when mediated through technology. That might have felt foreign a century ago, but not anymore.”