Where the Other Wild Things Are
WILDFLOWERSBy LiniersWe all think we’re familiar with children’s play, from seeing it around us or remembering our own youth. It becomes background noise: princesses, pirates, nothing special. But if we really listen, as the Argentine comics artist and picture book illustrator Ricardo Liniers Siri does, we can discover a surprising and sometimes scary world through which children move fearlessly, just under our noses. In his early-reader graphic novel “Wildflowers” — the final, stand-alone volume in a three-book ode that also includes “The Big Wet Balloon” and “Goodnight, Planet” — Liniers (who goes by this single name professionally) lets us glimpse the lush undergrowth his daughters inhabit when they think no one’s watching.The story opens with a disturbing image: the smoking wreckage of a plane, nose buried in a mountainside. But we find our three heroines unscathed on a beach, taking it all in stride. The youngest wonders if her butterfly friend was on the plane. The oldest sets some ground rules: “Butterflies don’t go on airplanes.” The middle sister declares that it’s time to explore the island. And they’re off!Liniers’s lovely watercolor-and-ink artwork is packed with detail that kids can lose themselves in. A giant flower talks to the youngest sister, declaring her the strangest wildflower it has ever seen. The girls discover a tiny house, home to an equally tiny gorilla, and an ominous sign that reads “Only Reality Can Kill a Dragon.” Popcorn-snow provides a much-needed snack. There is a palpable sense of danger throughout, but that’s part of the thrill. “I love being a flower,” the middle sister cries. “And I love being wild!” the youngest roars.Maurice Sendak did a masterly job capturing the untamed underbelly of childhood, most famously in “Where the Wild Things Are.” Adults are unsettled by his hero Max’s occasional violence and the genuinely dangerous creatures he conjures up — it’s not how we like to imagine our kids playing. But children recognize it; that’s what the world is like to them. “Wildflowers” feels like an older sister to Sendak’s work, maybe taking place on the next island over from Max’s wild rumpus.