What’s on TV This Week: ‘Snowpiercer’ and ‘Resident Alien’
Between network, cable and streaming, the modern television landscape is a vast one. Here are some of the shows, specials and movies coming to TV this week, Jan. 25-Jan. 31. Details and times are subject to change.SNOWPIERCER 9 p.m. on TNT. Daveed Diggs and Jennifer Connelly star in this science-fiction thriller series, based on both Bong Joon Ho’s sci-fi film of the same name and on the series of French graphic-novels that inspired that film. All three share a biting social commentary and a post-apocalyptic setting: A train circling a frozen earth ravaged by a climate calamity, carrying a population of human survivors who are divided by class. The first season of the TV series introduced a former police detective (Diggs) and a member of the train’s bourgeois leadership, Melanie Cavill (Connelly), who holds a rare sympathy for the train’s lower-class inhabitants. The second season, debuting on Monday night, will reveal more about the train’s mysterious billionaire creator, played by Sean Bean. The show has unplanned echoes with real, present life — as Connelly pointed out in an interview with The New York Times in May of last year, when the first season debuted. “Everyone on that train has been separated from their communities, the lives that they lived, the places that they loved,” she said. “We didn’t imagine that, by time this show came out, we would all be living a version of that.” Going into the second season, that grave resonance remains.UNSTOPPABLE (2010) 5:30 p.m. on AMC. For a choo-choo experience with less social bite (but more wizz-banging) than “Snowpiercer,” consider “Unstoppable,” an action movie with Denzel Washington and Chris Pine. Directed by Tony Scott, the film casts Washington as a veteran railman who gets paired with a younger conductor (Pine). The plot follows the pair’s efforts to stop a runaway train filled with toxic cargo, which threatens to cause an environmental catastrophe should the train derail. Their mission makes for “nutty, kinetic entertainment,” Manohla Dargis wrote in her review for The Times. Scott, she wrote, “creates an unexpectedly rich world of chugging, rushing trains slicing across equally beautiful industrial and natural landscapes.”