Goya: The Dreams, the Visions, the Nightmares
So much of our culture is bound in a straitjacket of our own fashioning: in a dull, uniform moralism, more occupied with saying the right thing than saying something well. It’s rooted, I’ve come to believe, in a fear of our own depths, and of what we’d have to admit about ourselves if we actually risked looking inward. What if you let your imagination roam? What if you just drew, or wrote, without fear of being wrong? What if you discovered that you are a great artist, but you yourself are not so perfect?“Goya’s Graphic Imagination,” opening this week at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, offers a vital tonic from an artist with (to our eyes) all the right political commitments: horrified by violence, revolted by unearned privilege, standing up for freedom and knowledge and rights for all. Those commitments, though, were worth nothing on their own — nothing without the free play of his unconscious, whose shadows cast all his liberal principles into doubt. Goya let those doubts take whatever form they would in drawings and in series of prints, above all the ironic “Caprichos” and ferocious “Disasters of War.” Here, in the privacy of the studio, an Enlightenment faith in human progress crashed into uncertainty, terror, bewilderment.Francisco Goya (1746-1828) served as an official artist to the Spanish crown, and painted the Bourbon royals within the conventions of the day. His mature career, though, coincided with the bloodiest years in the country’s history: the Peninsular War (1807-14), pitting Napoleon’s occupying forces against three countries’ armies and bands of guerrillas. Spain would regain its independence, but under a capricious tyrant who presided over a campaign of censorship and arrests. Goya would leave the court, cover the walls of his country house with the tormented Black Paintings (now at the Prado in Madrid) and die in exile. The “Disasters” — his 82-print horror show of the Napoleonic occupation, the greatest antiwar art ever made — remained unpublished for another three decades.