7 Podcasts About the Art of the Scam
Scammers, grifters and con artists are always in season. But the summer of 2018 was memorably dubbed the “Summer of Scam,” following the release of several high-profile stories. First came John Carreyrou’s explosive nonfiction book “Bad Blood,” which chronicled the rise and fall of Elizabeth Holmes and her fraudulent biotech company Theranos, followed swiftly by Jessica Pressler’s New York magazine exposé about the fake heiress Anna Delvey (soon to be the subject of a Shonda Rhimes-produced Netflix series). Fraud bled into the winter with the release of two documentaries about the misbegotten Fyre Festival and its impresario, Billy McFarland. Our national appetite for stories about deception does not seem to have abated, and there’s a glut of nonfiction audio journalism to satisfy that craving.These seven podcasts delve deeper into scam stories you may already know from the headlines, Theranos included, and also illuminate some less familiar, like the extraordinary saga of how thousands of people were conned into blowing their life savings on a plot of worthless land in California.Los Angeles is packed with starry-eyed strivers desperate for their shot at the Hollywood dream and willing to try just about anything to get it, so it’s no surprise that cults, cons and pyramid schemes also thrive in the city. But even by the standards of Tinseltown, this saga is a wild ride. Beginning in 2015, a mysterious figure known only as the Con Queen of Hollywood bamboozled unsuspecting victims into accepting fake jobs on far-flung movie sets, by impersonating high-profile female executives and producers like Amy Pascal and Kathleen Kennedy. As the journalists Josh Dean and Vanessa Grigoriadis unpack the story throughout this 10-part series, it becomes clear that this is not a simple financial fraud, but a darker and more twisted power game that preys on the vulnerability of Hollywood hopefuls.Starter episode: “Chapter 1: The Hook”The last several years of the Silicon Valley tech boom have seen plenty of high-profile start-ups explode, then implode, from MoviePass to WeWork. But none comes close to the story of Elizabeth Holmes, once heralded as “the next Steve Jobs,” whose biotech company Theranos promised to revolutionize medicine by making blood draws easier, less painful and more accessible. There was just one problem — the technology was bogus. “The Dropout,” from ABC News, explores Holmes’s background, the canny and calculated ways she chose to present herself, and how she and her then-boyfriend, Ramesh Balwani, seemed to hoodwink not only their own staff, but a series of experts and gatekeepers who should have known better. Next month, the federal government’s case against Holmes and Balwani finally goes to trial.