Republicans Have Declared War on Coca-Cola and Baseball
Are you a Republican voter irked by the state of American politics? If so, party leaders have some exciting marching orders for you: Dump your Diet Coke and shut off that episode of “NCIS” — or whatever ViacomCBS show you may be watching. Cash in your Delta plane tickets, close your Citibank account, flush your Merck meds and tell your kids not to ship you anything via UPS. And, oh, yeah, no patronizing Major League Baseball until further notice. Not the Yankees. Not the Dodgers. Not even the poor Pirates.These restrictions may sound extreme, especially for a pandemic-weary populace, but they are part of a crucial new front in the culture war, the latest mark of true MAGA patriotism. The Republican Party has declared war on segments of corporate America for daring to protest, through words or, worse still, direct action, the ongoing assault on voting rights, and the troops are being rallied. Starting out, this means boycotts. Sprawling ones. (The hundreds of verboten Coca-Cola products alone are hard to keep track of — Dasani, Vitaminwater, Topo Chico!) But even more sacrifices, and chaos, may be yet to come.Ordinarily, Republicans enjoy a snuggly relationship with corporate America, which appreciates the party’s tax-slashing, antiregulatory inclinations. But the G.O.P.’s latest crusade hasn’t been so much pro-business as antidemocratic: pushing hundreds of measures in dozens of states that are expected to make voting more burdensome, especially for poor and minority communities.In Georgia, for instance, the Republican-controlled legislature passed a bill last month that contains “16 key provisions that will limit ballot access, potentially confuse voters and give more power to Republican lawmakers,” according to a Times analysis. These include tightening restrictions on absentee voting and making it illegal to provide water to people waiting in line to vote. (It remains unclear when proper hydration became part of a partisan power grab by Democrats.)