Declare Racism a Public Health Emergency
While Black and Latino people make up only 13 and 18 percent of the U.S. population, respectively, as of November they account for more than 50 percent of the country’s Covid-19 hospitalizations. In Los Angeles County, deaths among Latino people have increased more than 1,000 percent since November, nearly triple the rate for white residents. Native Americans have been nearly twice as likely as white people to die from Covid-19. The virus has killed a disproportionate number of Filipino nurses. To bring desperately needed relief to the communities of color that have been ravaged by the pandemic because of the effects of structural racism, the Department of Health and Human Services should declare racism a public health emergency.There is momentum behind this idea. Across the country, cities and states have declared racism a public health crisis. The American Academy of Family Physicians has also called for the declaration of a public health emergency. Last year, Senator Elizabeth Warren and Representatives Ayanna Pressley and Barbara Lee proposed a bill that would instruct the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention to create a center addressing the impact of racism on public health. The White House has created a Covid-19 health equity task force that will make recommendations to improve the federal government’s data on racial disparities and its response to them.Studies and recommendations are good, but communities of color need action now, and a declaration by H.H.S. that racism is a public health emergency would have immediate impact. Under the Public Health Service Act, the declaration would allow H.H.S. to allocate resources and personnel to tackle the issue, much as it has for the pandemic as a whole and for the opioid crisis. For instance, it could allow workers from hard-hit communities of color who lost their jobs because they had to take time off after becoming ill to use National Health Emergency Demonstration Grants to find employment.It’s true that policies designed for individuals of particular races may face legal challenges. But the programs that flow from a declaration that racism is a public health emergency could avoid this by targeting communities rather than individuals. A study published in August by amfAR, the Foundation for AIDS Research, found that predominately white counties had the lowest levels of coronavirus infection. This is no surprise, given that high rates of illnesses among Black and Latino people can be attributed in part to racist housing policies.