America’s Workplaces Are Still Too Dangerous
Fifty years ago today, when the Occupational Safety and Health Administration opened its doors, American workplaces were full of dangers. In 1970, an average of 38 workers were killed on the job every day, and many thousands more were injured or sickened by exposures to toxic chemicals. The law that created OSHA was revolutionary: It established, for the first time, the right to a safe workplace, free of serious hazards. Businesses had to comply with federal regulations and permit inspectors to examine their facilities.The agency, which I directed from 2009 to 2017, has improved working conditions for generations of Americans. It has prevented thousands of deaths and millions of injuries. Today, even with a much larger work force, 14 workers on average are killed on the job each day, a great improvement — although that’s still 14 deaths too many.But in recent years, progress has slowed. Fatality rates plateaued more than a decade ago. Workers of color, particularly Black and Latino workers, are overrepresented in dangerous occupations and thus disproportionately suffer the tragic consequences. About 3.5 million workers are reported injured on the job every year, but since many injuries aren’t recorded by employers, the true number is higher.The Covid-19 crisis serves as a reminder of the challenges of protecting the nation’s workers, millions of whom have risked their lives to provide medical care, stock grocery shelves and operate public transit. After the pandemic began, the Trump administration refused to issue new labor regulations, and OSHA did not require employers to take steps to prevent workers from becoming infected with the coronavirus. Countless workers were sickened. Many died and the virus spread from workplaces into communities. During his election campaign, President Biden committed to taking strong action, but thus far has not done so, although this week Politico reported that new guidelines may be forthcoming.