New Directors/New Films Turns 50 With a Bracingly Eclectic Lineup
A wildly eclectic, cutting edge and globe-spanning lineup has always epitomized New Directors/New Films, the annual showcase of emerging filmmakers presented by Film at Lincoln Center and the Museum of Modern Art. This year’s 50th anniversary edition is part of a citywide return to theaters, with in-person screenings taking place from Wednesday through to May 13. The program will also screen virtually (through May 8), along with an online retrospective of selections from decades past including early works by directors like Lee Chang-dong, Christopher Nolan and Charles Burnett.Color me shocked if any of this year’s participants wind up directing a Batman movie in a decade. Though if I had to guess based purely on the kineticism of the filmmaking, my vote would go to the Indian director P.S. Vinothraj for his gripping debut, “Pebbles.” It’s essentially a road movie, about a young boy and his fiendish, alcoholic father forced to trek home by foot in the drought-ridden hinterlands of Tamil country. Vinothraj palpably summons the violence and oppressive nature of their relationship — and their bleakly impoverished milieu — with intensity and tremendous visual flair.Significantly lighter in tone, but no less tragic in its own way, is the deceptively brisk festival opener, “El Planeta,” by the conceptual artist Amalia Ulman. Building on a lineage of delicate black-and-white comedies from Hong Sang-soo, Noah Baumbach and other directors, the film is anchored in the realities of Spain’s recent economic crisis. It unfolds as a series of vignettes, each one a droll, seemingly banal snapshot of the lives of a mother and daughter — fashion divas both — in the northern Spanish city of Gijón. With their fur coats and fancy dinners, the two women are obsessed with glamour and success to the point that they willfully ignore the looming threat of eviction, spending borrowed money on frivolous things rather than paying the bills. Ulman, the writer-director who also stars (opposite her actual mother), gradually reveals the extent of the women’s troubles with deft and sly humor, a refreshing and revealing reprieve from the overly dignified, forcefully stark poverty portraits we usually get.